and time-sensitive features, and for enabling more sophisticated forward modelling approaches. 7 CONCLUSIONS We have forward modelled the UV-NIR emission from galaxies in the CAMELS simulation suites, and used these to perform Simulation Based Inference (SBI) on galaxy luminosity functions and colours. All photometric catalogues are made publicly avail- able at https://camels.readthedocs.io/en/latest/data_ access.html for the community to use. Our findings are as follows: (i) We model luminosity functions and colour distributions in theGALEXFUV-NUV and SDSS ugrizphotometric bands for the Swift-EAGLE ,Illustris-TNG ,SimbaandAstridgalaxyformation models from 𝑧=0.1to6, and find significant differences between theirfiducialpredictions,particularlyintheiropticalandUVcolours. (ii) Cosmological and astrophysical parameters significantly im- pact the UV and optical luminosity functions and colours, with the relative impact depending on the subgrid galaxy formation model. In particular, we find that Ωmand𝜎8are both correlated with UV- optical colours, leading to redder galaxy distributions. (iii) We build an SBI model using the LtU-ILI framework to predict the values of the cosmological and astrophysical parameters from our combined luminosity functions and colours, and achieve relativelyaccurateandpreciseconstraintson Ωm,𝜎8,𝐴SN1&𝐴SN2 acrossallgalaxyformationmodels.TheAGNparametersarepoorly constrained due to limitations in the CAMELS simulation volumes restricting the abundance of massive haloes. (iv) WeperformafeatureimportanceanalysisusingtheIllustris- TNGmodel,andfindthatthetightconstraintson Ωmaresurprisingly driven by the UV-optical colour information. Colour information is similarly important for 𝜎8constraints. (v) We investigate constraints from distribution functions at higher redshifts, and find that 𝜎8is best constrained at cosmic noon (𝑧=2),ratherthan 𝑧=0.1.Thetightestconstraintsforallparameters are obtained by combining information from multiple redshifts. (vi) The constraints on 𝜎8are surprising given the lack of any spatial or clustering information in our chosen features. We find thatenhancedclustering,parametrisedbyhigher 𝜎8,leadstoearlier formingandmoremetalenrichedgalaxies,whichmanifeststhrough theirstarformationandmetalenrichmenthistories,andsubsequently their luminosities and colours. (vii) As a test of robustness we apply a model trained on one simulationtoanother,andfindpoorgeneralisability,asseeninmany other CAMELS analyses. We attribute this to differences in the un- MNRAS 000, 1–27 (2024)24 C. C. Lovell et al. derlying subgrid prescriptions in the galaxy formation models, but alsoidentifyinflexibilityinourforwardmodelasapotentialculprit. Theseresultssuggestthatdistributionsofgalaxyluminositiesand colours across the UV-optical wavelength range contain not only a wealthofinformationonastrophysicalprocesses,butalsosignificant cosmological information content. Combined with more traditional sourcesofcosmologicalinformation,suchasgalaxyclusteringstatis- tics,thereispotentialtousethesepropertiestoprovidemorestringent constraints, and potentially break parameter degeneracies between probes. Calibration of subgrid models in hydrodynamic simulations of galaxy evolution is also an example where linking parameters to datainasimulation-drivenBayesianapproachhasadvantages(Elliott et al. 2021; Jo et al. 2023; Kugel et al. 2023); in this study we show how this can be done directly in observer space, rather than relying on inferred physical parameters obtained through SED fitting. However, we have also shown the sensitivity of our inference to the underlying galaxy formation model. Whilst we have discussed a numberofapproachesforovercomingthisinSection5.4,ingeneral improvedmodelswillhelptoreducethedomainshiftwhenapplying torealdata.Inaddition,exploringlargerparameterspaceswithmore physically motivated parameterisations of the astrophysics (e.g. the 28parameterCAMELSSOBOLset;Nietal.2023)willhelptocover a larger volume of the astrophysical and cosmological parameter hypervolume. In addition, the simple forward model for galaxy emission em- ployed here can also be modified. The fidelity could be increased, for example by using radiative transfer approaches (Camps & Baes 2015; Narayanan et al. 2021) to self-consistently produce a wider range of attenuation curves seen in the real Universe (Narayanan et al. 2018), or alternatively a larger range of parameters in the sim- ple models employed here could be explored. This is one of the key developmentgoalsof synthesizer (Lovelletal. in prep.,Roperetal. in prep.):toallowarapidexplorationofuncertainparametersinthe forwardmodel.Thisisstillahugedatachallenge,giventhesizeofa simulationsuitesuchasCAMELS( >200milliongalaxiesacrossall suites and snapshots). As described in Section 6.2, there are a number of difficulties to comparingdirectlywithobserveddatainanSBIframework.Infuture workwewillovercomeanumberoftheselimitations,atwhichpoint themethodwillbedirectlyapplicabletoanumberoffuturesurveys, such as Euclid (Euclid-Collaboration et al. 2024) and LSST (Ivezić et al. 2019), containing billions of sources. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Viraj Pandya for providing the GAMA catalogues used to construct the observed rest-frame colour distributions. We also thank Mat Page, Sotiria Fotopoulou, Shy Genel, Yongseok Jo, ChangHoon Hahn, Greg Bryan, Rachel Cochrane and Stephen Wilkins for useful discussions. This work was supported by the Si- mons Collaboration on “Learning the Universe”. This work used the DiRAC Memory Intensive service (Cosma7) at Durham Uni- versity, managed by the Institute for Computational Cosmology on behalf of the STFC DiRAC HPC Facility (www.dirac.ac.uk). The DiRAC service at Durham was funded by BEIS, UKRI and STFC capital funding, Durham University and STFC operations grants. DiRAC is part of the UKRI Digital Research Infrastruc- ture. The data used in this work were, in part, hosted on equip- ment supported by the Scientific Computing Core at the Flat- iron Institute, a division of the Simons Foundation. This researchmade use of the Spanish Virtual Observatory (https://svo.cab.inta- csic.es) project funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/ through grant PID2020-112949GB-I00. TS acknowledges support by NSF grant AST-2421845 and NASA grants 80NSSC24K0089 and 80NSSC24K0084. DAA acknowledges support by NSF grant AST-2108944, NASA grant ATP23-0156, STScI grants JWST- GO-01712.009-A and JWST-AR-04357.001-A, Simons Foundation Award CCA-1018464, and Cottrell Scholar Award CS-CSA-2023- 028 by the Research Corporation for Science Advancement. AG is grateful for support from the Simons Foundation. We list here the roles and contributions of the authors accord- ing to the Contributor Roles Taxonomy (CRediT)7.Christopher C. Lovell:Conceptualization,Datacuration,Formalanalysis,Investiga- tion,Methodology,Software,Visualization,Writing-originaldraft, Writing-review&editing. TjitskeStarkenburg :Conceptualization, Investigation,Validation,Writing-Review&Editing. MatthewHo : Methodology, Software, Investigation, Verification. Daniel Anglés- Alcázar, Francisco Villaescusa-Navarro : Resources, Data Cura- tion,Writing-Review&Editing. KartheikIyer,RachelSomerville, LauraSommovigo :Conceptualization,Investigation,Writing-Re- view & Editing. William J. Roper : Methodology, Software, Writ- ing - Review & Editing. Austen Gabrielpillai, Alice E. Matthews : Writing - review & editing. DATA AVAILABILITY The full CAMELS public data repository is available at https: //camels.readthedocs.io . This includes the photometric cata- logues. Scripts for training and running the inference pipeline are made available at https://github.com/christopherlovell/ camels_observational_catalogues . Download and installa- tion instructions for Synthesizer are available at https:// flaresimulations.github.io/synthesizer/ . Download and installation instruction for the LtU-ILI package are provided at https://github.com/maho3/ltu-ili/tree/main . REFERENCES Anglés-AlcázarD.,Faucher-GiguèreC.-A.,KerešD.,HopkinsP.F.,Quataert E., Murray N., 2017, MNRAS, 470, 4698 Appleby S., Davé R., Kraljic K., Anglés-Alcázar D., Narayanan D., 2020, MNRAS, 494, 6053 Bellstedt S., Robotham A. S. G., 2024, ProGeny II: the impact of libraries and model configurations on inferred galaxy properties in SED fit- ting,doi:10.48550/arXiv.2410.17698, http://arxiv.org/abs/2410. 17698 Bernstein R. A., Freedman W. L., Madore B. F., 2002, ApJ, 571, 56 BirdS.,NiY.,DiMatteoT.,CroftR.,FengY.,ChenN.,2022,MNRAS,512, 3703 Borrow J., Anglés-Alcázar D., Davé R., 2020, MNRAS, 491, 6102 Borrow J., Schaller M., Bower R. G., Schaye J., 2022, MNRAS, 511, 2367 Bose B., et al., 2021, MNRAS, 508, 2479 Bravo M., Lagos C. d. P., Robotham A. S.