and parame- tersoftheforwardmodel,suchasthedustattenuationmodel,which should lead to increased overlap in colour and luminosity space be- tween models. We will also explore contrastive learning (Le-Khac et al. 2020) and domain adaptation approaches (Roncoli et al. 2023; Ćiprĳanović et al. 2020, 2022), which have shown promise in over- coming these issues when combining models, and for extracting domain-invariant features, as well as approaches for excluding sig- nificant outliers (Echeverri-Rojas et al. 2023; de Santi et al. 2023a). 6 DISCUSSION 6.1 Cosmological Constraints The constraints on cosmological parameters demonstrated in Sec- tion 5.2 are surprising. By just considering UV-optical luminosity functions and colours we can obtain precise and accurate estimates ofΩmacrossdifferentsubgridgalaxyevolutionmodels.ForIllustris- TNG,Swift-EAGLEandSimbaweobtainaRMSEacrossthetestset of0.03,andforAstridslightlyhigherat0.07,whichrepresenthighly significantconstraints.ThesearetighterthanthoseobtainedbyHahn et al. (2024) on galaxies from the NASA-Sloan Atlas, despite only using summary statistics measured on a fraction of the number of galaxies. In Section 5.3 we show that, in Illustris-TNG, it is pre- dominantly galaxy colours that drive these significant constraints. This suggests that it is internalgalaxy properties that are affected by changes in the matter density, not just the overall abundance of haloes and therefore galaxies. This is supported by the dependence of the ML ratios on Ωm, which implicitly factors out the change in haloabundance.Thesefindingssomewhatsupportwhatwasfoundin Villaescusa-Navarro et al. (2022) and Echeverri-Rojas et al. (2023), wherethepropertiesofasinglegalaxywereusedtoobtainsignificant constraintson Ωm.Theconstraintsonmatterclustering,representedby𝜎8, are another surprising result presented in Section 5.2. For all four simulations we achieve a RMSE ⩽0.09, despite not including anyspatialinformationinourfeaturesatall.InSection5.3weshow that it is a combination of galaxy colours and luminosity functions that drives this good predictive accuracy in Illustris-TNG, which is in turn driven by the older ages of galaxy stellar populations in simulations with a higher 𝜎8. We stress that when interpreting these constraints quantitatively we must keep in mind that this analysis does not include any obser- vational uncertainties, which will degrade our constraints (see e.g. Hernández-Martínez et al. 2024). We discuss other observational considerations below. Additionally, we do not include any estimate of the simulation uncertainty; Jo et al. (2023) show that this can be derivedfromtheCVsetandusedwithinanemulatortoassessitsim- pact, and find that it can lead to wider estimated posteriors. Finally, our dust model does not depend in any way on galaxy properties. Includingthecorrelationsandcovariancesbetween,forexample,the massofdustandtheopticaldepth,orthestar-dustgeometryandthe form of the attenuation curve, will lead to degeneracies with some of the effects on the LFs and colours seen in Figures 5 and 6, which will degrade the constraints on cosmological parameters. However, conversely,thedustmodelitselfmayleakcosmologicalinformation, duetodependenciesontheSFZHfromeachgalaxy;weexplorethis effectwithourcurrentgalaxy-independentdustmodelbrieflyinSec- tion C. We will explore a more sophisticated model that takes these correlations into account in future work. 6.2 Performing SBI directly on observations When performing inference in a simulation based inference frame- work on cosmological parameters in particular, one must take into account the impact of changing the cosmological parameter on any forward modelled properties or distribution functions. In this study, MNRAS 000, 1–27 (2024)LtU: Parameter inference on photometry 23 where we focus on volume normalised rest-frame distribution func- tions, this manifests in two main ways; 𝐾-corrections for rest-frame photometry, and cosmological volume normalisation. For rest-frame photometry, the change in luminosity distance im- plied by a change in Ωmleads to differences in the redshift, and therefore a change in the rest-frame part of the spectrum probed by the photometric filter (at a given redshift). In observed catalogues, theemissionwithinafilterbandpassintherest-frameisestimatedby assuminga𝐾-correction(Hoggetal.2002).Thiscorrectionassumes ashapeforthespectrum,whichdependsontheassumedgalaxypop- ulation, and its evolutionary history. These properties are explicitly cosmologydependent;ifthecosmologyisupdated,the 𝐾-correction (or,morespecifically,the 𝐸-correction)mustbeupdatedinlinewith thiscosmology.InanSBIframework,updatingthetargetobservable on each parameter iteration is not feasible. Instead, one could for- ward model into observer-frame fluxes, to avoid the application of a 𝐾-correction altogether. Similarly, the change in apparent distance implied by a change inΩmalso leads to changes in the differential comoving volume at a given redshift. This impacts the volume normalisation of any derivednumbercountdistributions,suchasluminosityfunctions.In ordertoperformalike-for-likecomparison,itisnecessarytocorrect for this volume normalisation offset as a function of cosmology. Alternatively, one can forward model into the observer-frame, and normalisebytheskyarea,toavoidanydependenceoncosmological parameters. In this study we focus on rest-frame ,volume normalised distri- bution functions, rather than observer frame fluxes. This is to better understandtheimpactofvariousmodellingassumptionsontherest- frame properties, and better link to the underlying physics of each model. We are also limited by the relatively small volume of the CAMELS simulations, which makes it more difficult to project into observer-space through the construction of a lightcone. Finally, whilst observed luminosity functions from SDSS and GAMA are reasonably well covered in the intermediate magnitude range over our 1P parameters (see Figures 5 – 11), it is clear that we struggle to reproduce the detailed, complex colour distributions. Whilst the broad trends are captured, some bins in colour are out of distribution at this resolution. This is due to the known difficulty ofreplicatingthedetailedabundanceandcolourdistributionsinob- servational space, even over this extended parameter space (see e.g. Trayfordetal.2015).Infutureworkwewillinvestigatetheimpactof varyingmoreparametersinourforwardmodel,suchasthedustopti- caldepthandattenuationcurve,toinvestigatewhetherthisincreases the compatibility of observed colours with the simulations. For these reasons, we avoid performing inference directly on the observeddistributionfunctionsintherest-frame,andleaveadetailed comparison with observations in the observer-frame to future work. 6.3 Forward Modelling Limitations As touched on briefly in Sections 3 and 2, there are a number of limitations in our modelling of the emission from galaxies, many of which are set by the fidelity of the fiducial CAMELS suites. Due to the low spatial and mass resolution of the hydro simulations we do notresolvegalaxysizes,whichprecludestheirinclusionasfeatures. We also therefore cannot include features such as emission profiles, or resolved maps of the emission in different bands. These features maycontaincrucialcosmologicalandastrophysicalinformation,and will be regularly estimated in upcoming wide field surveys, such as those from Euclid and Rubin. The mass resolution in particular also places constraints on re-solvedshorttimescalevariationsinthestarformationhistory.These are important for predicting the recent star formation. which is key forself-consistentlyproducingthecontributionfromnebularlineand continuum emission. This recent star formation can be estimated by smoothing the star formation history, or even by adding small scale variation through power spectral density methods (Iyer et al. 2020), however these typically require training from higher resolution in- put simulations. Finally, the application of detailed dust radiative transferapproaches,whilstalsolimitedbytheircomputationalcom- plexity, are also inappropriate for such low-resolution simulations, sincethestar-dustdistributionwillbepoorlyestimated.Insummary, whilst the fidelity of the CAMELS simulations is sufficient for an an analysis of broad band photometric emission in the UV-optical, higher resolution simulations will be required to explore these more detailed spatial